She's a biage. There's no way to say
that nicely. My queen just came right
out there.
>> I'm Wesley Morris and this is
Cannonball. Today we're going to party
like it's 1925. Baby,
you've probably heard somewhere that The
Great Gatsby turned 100 this year.
People have been celebrating this thing
as one of those profound literary
achievements that's had a big influence
on the culture because it it kind of
has. People who don't seem to have read
this book have been using it to
celebrate. I'm looking at you, world
leader, who threw a Gatsby themed
Halloween party. I didn't want this
anniversary to end without I don't know
trying to think through it myself, which
is kind of nuts because up until
recently, I didn't think I had a
terribly deep or profound relationship
with this book. But a few years ago, I
got an email from a book publisher
asking if I wanted to write the
introduction for a new edition of The
Great Gatsby. It was coming out in 2021.
And was I interested? I was like, "You
want me to do what?" I mean, everybody's
written about this book. What could I
possibly have to say that's new? What
could I possibly say about this book
that was important? And then I did some
thinking and I realized, wait a minute,
I've read this book at least three times
in three different phases of my life.
Huh? Why did I do that? The very first
time I read it was because I had to.
Like most students who grew up in this
country, it's required reading. The
second time I read it, I was in my early
20s. And what I realized then is that
this book, this book was young ones,
too. It was once contemporary with the
time in which it was made, the so-called
Roaring 20s during the Harlem
Renaissance. And you know who else was
young once? F. Scott Fitzgerald, the guy
who wrote the book. And when this book
came out in 1925, he was 28 years old. I
mean, think about that. I sat around and
I had all these thoughts and I was like,
you know what? I am going to say yes to
writing an introduction to this new
edition of The Great Gatsby. And I'm
really glad that I did that. I actually
spent that introduction wondering very
hard, why is this one of the books that
we keep coming back to? So, with me
today are two people who are also in
some kind of long-term relationship with
this book, and I'm looking forward to
asking them, what is wrong with us? And
what is it about this book that lives in
us the way that this one has? I've
actually been talking on and off about
these questions, sometimes in public,
with the superbly incisive novelist
Minjin Lee. Her books include Free Food
for Millionaires and Pachinko. Her new
book, American Hagwan,
that title, is coming next year. And she
also wrote an introduction to Penguin's
2021 edition of The Great Gatsby. As Ben
and I were figuring out how we were
going to talk about this book for this
show, I also learned that my pal and
colleague Gilbert Cruz, who runs the New
York Times book review, he reads The
Great Gatsby almost every year. And I
was like, "No way. What is this Gatsby?
He's got to come in here with me and men
and talk about this. Men Gilbert, hello.
Welcome to Cannonball.
Wesley, thank you for having me on.
>> You are welcome. Thanks for coming.
>> Wesley and
>> I'm honored.
>> Old sports. I'm happy to be here.
>> Old sports. Okay, wait. Before we do
anything, I want you in the fewest
number of sentences you can give me.
What is the plot of this book? Here's
mine. North Dakota farm boy creates fake
identity and amasses fortune to impress
wealthy city girl. Death ensues. Min,
your turn. A boy who goes to New York.
He becomes friends with a really
romantic character.
>> Mhm.
>> Right. And then sort of becomes his
Sarano de Berserk.
>> Okay.
>> Kind of like that. Yes. Yes.
>> Kind of like a wingman to Gatsby to
connect with his second cousin, Daisy.
>> Mhm.
>> And then there's two adulteries that
happen and then there's a tragedy and
then the boy goes back to Minnesota.
>> All right, Gilbert, what's your plot sum
summary?
>> One summer in the 1920s, a bunch of
people in New York get really drunk and
some of them die at the end.
>> I'll take that. So, I was reading the
New York Times wedding section and then
I I saw this really adorable couple
getting married and it said they had a
Gatsby themed wedding.
>> Mhm.
>> And all I could think is did they read
the book?
>> Yeah. What is that? Isn't that just
Isn't that just a wedding? Honestly,
like does that mean just people just got
married in flapper dresses?
>> Jazz age attire flappers. I think that
Gatsby has come to stand in for
>> chartreuse drinks like book. This is
like there's two adulteries in this
book. There are three deaths. I don't
understand like how that could be
>> three deaths in five pages even like
>> right
>> and this book just for a little context
is just it's set during the Roaring 20s
a time of great possibility and jazz is
is the trap music is the pop music of
this day. So there are people like
bringing what they experience in Harlem
when they go out to Long Island having
these parties and Charlestoning till
they can't stand up anymore. And that
energy, that urban energy creates this
suburban or you know affluent latitude
that these characters are experiencing
on page after page of this book where
they don't do anything but sit around
and talk about how they're not doing
anything. So I'm curious. I'll start
with you, Min. When when did this book
come into your life? Like when did your
relationship with The Great Gatsby
start?
>> Well, I came to the America, I think,
when I was seven. Right. So,
>> from South Korea.
>> From South Korea. And at some point in
my life, I just had to read every single
book that mattered. I just decided and
then I think I was in high school, maybe
freshman or sophomore year, and then I
was told that you had to read The Great
Gatsby. Not from my teachers. I just had
to read it. So then I bought it and I
didn't really have money to buy books
but I bought it because I thought this
was such an important book and I read it
over and over and over again and it has
become this really important book to me.
>> Who told you? Do you remember who told
you to read it?
>> Probably librarians and important people
in my life. This kind of like I took my
reading cues from cool people in my
life.
>> Okay,
>> I know that sounds so nerdy. No, that's
that sounds like I don't know who the
cool people are telling you to read
things that aren't like Z, but
>> Well, I mean, I went to Bronx Science.
That means that I had
>> Oh, that could have been anybody.
>> That could have been anybody. So, when I
met girls who I thought were really
bookish and cool and interesting to me,
and they would say, "Oh, I'm reading
this book." And I'd be like, "Oh, I'm
going to go get that book and read it."
And mostly I borrowed it, but Gatsby
actually bought and it was only$2.25, I
think.
>> Was it this version that Gilbert has on
the table? It looks like that, but I
didn't bring mine because it's so
fragile that I was afraid that it was
going to disintegrate.
>> I regret bringing this in because it is
falling apart.
>> Yeah. And it means a lot.
>> Sacrifices, I think.
>> Um, Gilbert, what about you?
>> Uh, also in high school, also in the
Bronx, but I did not get into Bronx
science. I went to a Catholic all boy
school. And as is the case at so many
high schools, the baseball teacher was
also the English teacher. And I remember
him. I could see him to this day cuz he
he was a a broad shouldered man who wore
shirts that were too small for him. Uh
holding this book up
>> in front of that edition.
>> I think it was this edition. This might
actually be my mother's edition which I
remember being
>> cuz that one is mine. That's that's the
edition that I
>> Yeah, this is uh had this for a very
long time holding it up trying to get us
interested in the book and most of us
possibly even me being very uninterested
in the book. It was only a couple years
later when I returned to it on my own
that I fell in love with it and then I I
read it every year for a time and now I
think I read it every other year. But I
definitely have done this book more than
a dozen times if not more.
>> Is there a day or something that you
read it on the is like is there an
anniversary of summer April 10th?
>> It's a sweaty book. It's a summary book.
So it is it feels like summer to me. Uh
there's that line in the book that I
feel like was on social media for a
while when X was Twitter and when that
was still a thing. You know, do you
always look for the first day of summer
and miss it or whatever the line is?
People would quote that on the first day
of summer.
>> There are some really good um seasonal
things here. Uh I'm gonna Oh, shoot.
Like there is just reminding me there's
like a there's a there's a moment in the
book. I'll find it because I actually do
want to read it because it's a great
line. Um, and it it like perfectly
captures
what it's like to have the seasons
change. Fitzgerald describes it this
way. That feeling now it was a cool
night with that mysterious excitement in
it which comes at the two changes of the
year. This man, I mean,
he can write a sentence. There's truly
honestly two days in the entire year
where you have what I would describe as
an involuntary reaction to being outside
and it just you're filled with hope and
lust and happiness.
>> No, it feels like a caress like you get
that sort of like warm weird wind and
then you have the light and then it
feels like someone's kind of like
touching you and then that's where the
lust probably comes in. It is definitely
erotic, but it also is transferable,
right? Yes. Because you also suddenly
just want all these people that you see
people you don't really in like under
ordinary circumstances. I was otherwise
engaged. I don't want anybody else. But
this day, you want you want everything.
You want to eat everything. You want to
be with everybody. Um it's a it's a
strange feeling. And he captures there's
so many
inarticulable
experiences captured in this book.
facial expression.
>> He's a very sensual writer.
>> Yes. Yes.
>> It's really really sensual. Like you can
feel it. You can smell it. You can feel
the quality of the air. And he's so
gifted.
>> Like there are a lot of people who are
haters of this book.
>> I have met many
>> I've met them. I've met them. I've met
them
>> and they'll always like, "Oh, I don't
want to read that book. Why should I
read?" I just think, "Did you really
give it a fair chance?"
>> Yeah. They don't really have a case
against it. No. In my experience,
they're just like, but part of the
reason they don't want to read it
>> is that it was given to them. It was an
assignment.
>> There are a lot of books that are
assigned. You don't have to hate them.
>> Yeah. But there are a few books that are
called, to use word in the title, that
are called great as often as as this one
are. There are many books that we're
supposed to think are great books by,
you know, Mark Twain and Faulner and all
these writers. But I think there is
something about this book uh that is
often called the great American novel,
which is asignation that has so much
meaning that turned people off.
>> It's definitely one of the great
American novels, period. Right.
>> Oh, I think so.
>> And I think one of the things that I
mean I'd like to come back to later is
is the company that it keeps in that in
that class, but also what about it
qualifies it as being that? But I want
to stay for a second in this in this
habitual relationship that that we seem
to have with this book. Like why of all
the things that you could be reading,
Gilbert, is it is this the book you read
even every other year?
>> Uh a few reasons. One, it's short as you
>> and if you're going to reread a book,
pick a short one.
>> Uh because life is too short. Uh so that
helps. Two, it is it's just gorgeously
written. I mean, there are I I feel like
we could spend this entire conversation
just quoting lines, but every time I dip
into it, I feel like there's something
else that I take out and want to
memorize because it is evocative uh in a
different way. But the real reason I
I've reread it so many times is because
it uh is a book that is about time or at
least about a certain time in one's
life. And therefore, it has meant
something to me every time that I've
read it,
>> something different. and therefore it
has meant something different to me
every time that I've read it.
>> What was the time that you read it where
it meant the most or surprised you by
how much it meant? Maybe maybe that's
the way to put it.
>> Uh pro well the first time I read it uh
the first time I really read it not for
school. I think I I fell in love with um
how intoxicating it made youth seem,
>> how fun it made New York seem,
>> how fun it made drinking seem, how fun
it made uh staying up until 4 in the
morning and then catching a train back
from the Pennsylvania station seem. And
as someone who has to commute into Penn
Station every day now, it is definitely
not that.
>> Uh so that
>> you definitely run for some trains in
your in your life.
>> Uh so many too many. Uh so so the you
know that's why I initially fell in love
with this and and and then I refell in
love with it uh when I was a little bit
older because I was able to see that
that was all the surface stuff and what
it actually was about was uh a hope and
disappointment class in America and how
you know as as Nick tells Jay you can
never sort of recreate the past and you
can never recapture these things that
you uh think are owed to you. Uh, and
that just it, as they say, it hits
different when you are a little older.
>> Yeah. Yeah. What about you, men?
>> I love the yearning.
>> I love the yearning in it so much
because everybody's yearning and they're
really honest about their yearning.
But I think that the reason why it is a
great American novel is because it does
something really complicated. It is
satire, tragedy, and coming of age.
>> Mhm.
The fact that he can do all three things
in this tight architecture is so
impressive because when you actually
take this book apart, you're going,
"Holy [__] how did you do that?
>> How did you do that?" Yeah.
>> And also at 27
>> Yeah.
>> at 27 to be able to do that in terms of
craft.
>> I don't I haven't seen a book like this.
Truly.
>> Yeah. And this is Fitzgerald's third
novel.
>> Third novel.
>> Um the least of those three. It total
failure. It did not do well.
>> Really bummed him out because he needed
the money. You really need the money.
>> Critically acclaimed. You know,
everybody except HL Mein loved it. And
you call it a tragedy. You call it um a
satire.
>> A satire
>> and a coming of age story. What you
don't call it is a romance.
>> Yeah. I don't think of it as a romance.
and he thinks that part of the reason it
did not do well is because it has no
good women characters
>> and because I think people reading it
who were looking for romance don't
experience that
>> that's not have a happy ending.
>> It is a romantic book but it is not
about romance. Yeah. Right. Um it's a
well it is about a it is about a
nonsexual romance. Right. It is about a
romance for possibility. It's a romance
between a citizenry and it and their
country, right? Or like the promise of
this country.
>> I also call it a bromance between Nick
and Gatsby.
>> Yes, a bromance. I do want to talk about
that. We'll come back to it. Uh but I
also think that it might be useful to
just back up and just talk about who the
characters in this book are. So, we've
Jay Gatsby, of course, the man who
builds this fortune to attract this
woman Daisy,
>> who is Nick's Nick Carowway's cousin.
Nick is this aspiring bond bond
tradesman. He goes from Long Island to
New York every day. and he lives across
he gets ne he lives next door on
West Egg to Jay Gatsby. And then across
the the the bay on the other side in in
in East Egg is Daisy Buchanan who lives
with her husband Tom and their daughter
Pammy. And the mysterious Jordan Baker
comes over every once in a while, lays
on the sofa, and just spreads gossip and
rumors all day long. That's our cast.
Did I leave anybody out?
>> Uh, you left a couple people out. You
left out uh George Wilson, who's a man
that owns a garage between Long Island
and Queens, and his wife Myrtle, who is
important because she is the person that
Tom is having an affair with. Uh,
>> how could I forget? Uh you also left out
uh Myra Wolfshime who is someone who
pops up occasionally in the story and is
sort of the the the the person behind
>> Jay Gatsby who has helped him become the
rich bootleger that he is
>> a mentor in some ways but also kind of
clever about how he's mentoring.
>> Yeah, I think we hit them all. I'm also
interested to I don't know talk a little
bit about or hear you guys talk about
the characters who've changed the most
to you or a character who's continued to
mean something different every time you
go back to it. Gilbert.
Uh boy, I feel am I going to get too
personal here? Um
>> there's no too personal, Gilbert. I
>> personal is good. I think the the
characters that have changed the most to
me are the ones that I have identified
with, right? And and so if we're talking
about the the what I think are the two
main characters are the two main
characters of the book, Nick and Jay or
Nick and Gatsby. When I was younger, I
thought of myself as someone who wanted
to be Gatsby. M
>> I was someone who
>> came from a certain place and wanted to
go to another place. Wanted to reinvent
myself into someone who could
>> be successful, someone who could thrive
in America, someone who did not sort of
grow up uh you know in a lower middle
class family in the Bronx. And so the
idea of Jay, the idea of Jay Gats
changing himself, reinventing himself,
it seemed like something that was a
thing you could do in America. Mhm.
>> Uh and it seemed admirable, possible, um
even if it didn't work out for him in
the end,
>> right?
>> Uh and now
>> I see Nick as the one that is the person
that I think has changed the most in my
estimation.
>> He starts the book by saying, "I've
never tried to to hold judgments against
other people."
>> Yes. Yeah.
>> Uh he says at one point in a profoundly
I thought reading it again a few years
ago, arrogant moment, I'm one of the
only honest people I know.
>> Uh I used to think Nick was like solid.
He was an honest guy. Like he's a good
guy.
>> This is a great I was going to ask you
guys about
>> I sort of think Nick is kind of a chump
actually the now that I think about it
like he is telling us the story. So,
we're only seeing Gatsby through, you
know, primarily through his eyes and
what we hear from some other people. And
he is so high on himself and he believes
that he is such a good person that I I
don't know that I trust Nick in the way
that I used to. Yes.
>> The first time I read the story.
>> Well, I think that some of that is just
how we get trained to read, right? Yeah.
I learned how to I learned how to read
differently by reading this book
>> because how's that?
>> Well, I mean, have you ever sat multiple
times with somebody who keeps telling
the same story?
>> Yes.
>> And the story changes?
>> Like
>> family members,
>> they're just getting stuff wrong.
>> Yeah.
>> I I just I don't trust this dude. And I
think part of I don't think he's lying,
but there there are some things there's
some slight of hand that Fitzgerald
tries where Nick will back up and be
like, "I forgot to tell you something."
Basically, um or here's something I I I
w I did not witness, but it happened.
And I'm like,
>> chapter nine.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I'm just like, you know,
sir, no. I mean, I'm going to take it
cuz you're giving it to me. I don't know
if I believe it. Well, he's a real
pleaser personality. He even tells you
in chapter one that there are times when
he has to fain sleep because he doesn't
really want to hear your personal story
because he's got a kind of a effect
that's a pleaser. So, he's kind of like,
"Don't get too close because I really
don't want to be too close. I know I
look like somebody you can tell secrets
to, but I don't want to hear it." And
you're thinking, "Oh, he's an ass."
>> Yeah. Yeah. He says in uh he and Tom
went to Yale, right? They went to New
Haven. Uh he says in college he was
considered a politician because he was
often a person that people would open up
to right yep and give their secrets to
probably because he had uh a certain
affect maybe he was not that interesting
a person so he didn't have much to add
to conversations and I think it leads
him to believe a certain conception of
himself that may not be accurate.
>> Men who's changing for you
>> Myrtle.
>> Oh Myrtle. I know. It's really odd
because she's someone I really didn't
notice.
>> Huh.
>> She was an object in the plot.
>> I mean, nobody is noticing Myrtle.
>> But as I've gotten older, I have been
thinking about a person like Myrtle.
>> A person who takes less than she
deserves, aspires to be someone who she
shouldn't want to aspire to be,
>> and then has a tragic ending.
>> And her husband, she hates her husband.
So she cheats on him with a rich guy,
Tom Buchanan, who's kind of a white
supremacist,
>> kind of white sup. He is recommending
works of white supremacy for his friends
to read.
>> Yes. And eugenics. So he's a bad guy.
Tom Buchanan is a bad guy. So what I
found really interesting about Myrtle is
that she really wants Tom, but I think
she has an obsession with Daisy
>> or the Daisy archetype.
>> And I found that relationship between
these two women. They're both objects.
The women characters in Fitzgerald's
work, they're not great. He actually
thought so.
>> Yes.
>> And he actually blames the failure of
Gatsby at his time because the women
have really horrible endings. Both of
them. I mean, Daisy is really truly an
evil woman. So, she's evil.
>> I just say it. Yes. You need to say it.
You need to say
>> it.
>> No. No. She's a biage. I mean, like
there's no way to say that nicely.
Well, you know what's amaz like at some
point, you know,
>> my queen just came right out there.
>> Yeah,
>> I got personal.
>> I mean, Daisy,
well, I'm just cur like but but how has
Myrtle changed for you?
>> Well,
>> over time,
>> I didn't really think about her.
>> Mhm. when I read the book several times
and then like as I got older and then I
heard more stories about adultery like I
was trying to understand like why do
women participate in these relationships
that cannot work.
>> It isn't like Myrtle ever thought that
Tom was going to leave Daisy for her.
>> No.
>> Right. I mean she's smart enough to know
that and yet she's kind of saying I will
take the crumbs.
>> Yes. And we know for sure that Daisy,
even though she's the desired object,
>> she's the one that is beautiful and
wanted and has the voice of money. But
here's Myrtle and he satisfied she
satisfies something in Tom that Daisy
cannot.
>> I mean,
>> her fierce vitality, her sexuality.
>> Yes, I was going to say his penis.
>> Sure. It satisfies his penis.
And then in the very end when she has to
be so brutally murdered, it was so
interesting. And then the more I learned
about Fitzgerald's biography, I
realized, oh no, Myrtle is also Zelda.
>> Mhm.
>> And then once I figured that out, I
thought, "Oh, now I understand why she
had to be like almost hacked up."
>> Mhm. I mean, there's a really brutal
description of of of her body in the
wake of this accident, right?
>> Her breast gets lpped off.
>> Yeah. So, I have a lot more sympathy for
Myrtle, even though obviously she's not
that nice and she is crass, but she is
from Queens and so am I. So, there you
go.
>> She seems kind of fun.
>> I think Myrtle would be really a robust,
curvy woman, very vital, very sexy. She
probably smells like perfume, but
there's a kind of raw intelligence, a
kind of animal quality, but then very
smart and wants to get what she wants to
get, and yet doesn't know how to get
them. Not in a real way.
>> Wild.
>> A feral sexual being.
>> Like hot in bed.
>> You could totally see her being hot in
bed.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
>> Listening to you talk about Myrtle, I I
you know, I do I do want to think about
Tom because he is the he is the most
fascinating person in the book in some
ways. At least to me at this moment.
>> He's beautifully drawn.
>> Yes. And I think that, you know, there's
so many moments where Tom is both like a
homunculus
and a trogalodite, but also, you know, a
master of the universe,
>> but of but of nothing, right? Like,
think about I mean, with all due respect
to our polo people, think about what
polo is.
>> You get in a horse, you ride around, and
you smack a ball. like you get you you
got to make sure you don't step in any
any doodoo,
>> right? I mean, that's his basically his
life since he graduated from from Yale.
>> Um,
>> tough life.
>> Although he does not want to be known as
the polo player.
>> He does not he wants to he just wants to
sit back and watch all the weird people
at a Gatsby party. But Tom, to me, is
also weirdly the most modern of these
characters. um in that like his type is
still with us and you know I mean is in
various seats of power right
>> and there's this great moment where you
get a sense of both his insecurity and
sense of supremacy and it basically goes
like this this is Daisy um trying to
tell Tom to chill out as they're having
this fight and it's in this scene toward
the end of the book which I mean If you
don't mind, I will read a little bit of.
And this is all just before Gatsby and
Daisy jump in the car and accidentally
kill Myrtle. He isn't causing a row.
Daisy looked desperately from one to the
other, meaning from Gatsby to Tom.
You're causing a row. Please have a
little self-control. Self-control?
Repeated Tom incredulously. I suppose
the latest thing is to sit back and let
Mr. Nobody from nowhere make love to
your wife. Well, if that's the idea, you
can count me out. Nowadays, people begin
by sneering at family life and family
institutions, and next they'll throw
everything overboard and have
intermarriage between black and white.
And you know, I'm sorry, that person is
basically hosting cable news shows, ex
issuing executive orders, running
branches of our government right now.
It's just, you know, you know who never
goes out of style? Tom.
>> Yeah.
>> And there's something just really
fascinating about how weak and strong he
is. In every scene of this book, he is
both like physically imposing as written
by Fitzgerald, but also confused and
dupable at the same time. And yet, he's
also in control in a way that not
everybody can see. He's actually he
actually is playing chess with these
people's lives. Is he in control because
he has a lot of money or is it because
he's in full possession of his
masculinity? What do you think?
>> I think he is in control because he has
a lot of money. I think that no matter
how dumb he is, no matter how dumb a lot
of people are. If you have a lot of
money,
>> think he's dumb. We don't actually have
any proof.
>> I mean,
>> there's somebody there
from parties.
>> There's a great line about how often he
reads or doesn't read.
>> Yeah.
>> That is just five stars. Um, and you
know, you get the impression that he
went to college to play sports. He
didn't go to college to to do. And I
can't remember if he went to war. I know
Gatsby and Nick went to war. I cannot
remember. He did go to war. Go to war.
>> That's something we haven't talked about
that this is all these men have been to
war
>> and back. Um, but I think he has a lot
of money. So, no matter what happens, he
can come in and be confident in the idea
that he can solve a problem with his
money. Right.
>> But he loves Daisy, right?
I don't know if he loves I think he
might be like Gatsby. He might love the
idea of Daisy.
>> Daisy's an idea. She I mean he like
she's a
>> What does he love? Something like
>> So when he gets upset, do you think he's
just a humiliated so he loves his pride?
>> Absolutely.
>> You know, I have a theory about men.
>> Tell me
>> and a certain kind of man.
>> Straight men, powerful men, white men,
black men, what?
>> Let's be specific. I think there is a
kind of man and I think, you know, I
think it's interesting because I think
Donald Trump is every single character
in this book. I think he at different
points in his life has been Jay. He's
been Nick. Well, maybe not Nick, but
>> Myrtle,
>> but but I mean, yes, actually, yes. I
think that um that Daisy is somehow
I think that like the the sort of
conflation of him and all these other
people is is a thing that makes him
fascinating because he's mostly a
Gatsby, right? But he's got these I
mean, think about he came from he came
from Queens, right? He's a migrant from
a much closer area, right? But his his
desire to get into these upper echelons
of to become a person who has these
great parties that people come to a
person to, you know, become friends with
a Tom and a Daisy like that's still in
him,
>> right?
>> He wants to be liked.
>> And there's this great moment when Jay
Gatsby has died
>> because George Wilson has murdered him.
>> Yes. Murder, suicide,
>> and and then killed himself. George
Wilson. And lo and behold,
his father shows up. Mr. Gats
>> Henry
>> shows up and says the most remarkable
thing and he's like, you know, you know,
my son really could have been like James
J. Hill
>> the the railroad magnet.
>> Yeah.
>> And you know, here to for like really
interesting Canadian turn American
citizen motan, right?
>> And he could have made something of this
country.
>> My son Mhm.
>> And I'm reading this, you know, in this
in this moment and I'm like, yeah, the
one thing that's really fascinating
about this whole book is that it's all
about waste and it's all about things
not happening. These people don't do
anything. Like what does Gatsby's where
does the money come from? Comes from
bootlegging, right? Coming from breaking
the law and what
>> was a service not provided.
>> A service was provided. But think about
the service being provided right in
1922. It's like the worst thing you can
be. It's among the worst things you can
be. Um it it is I mean this is happening
during prohibition. This is a person who
these people don't make anything. They
don't contribute anything. They just
take these people don't even pay taxes.
Right? These are these are people so
in control of the system that they are
not that they're also not
beholdened to in any way. They're
operating by their own rules. And I just
feel like, you know, Jay to me there's
something
Gatsby to me is is in a lot of people
because the story of this book
is so
much a part of the story America tells
about itself. Maybe even in part because
this because Fitzgerald told it,
>> right? He's he created a paradigm for
people to ascribe themselves in. I mean
you yourself, Gilbert,
the paradigm spoke to you.
>> Absolutely.
>> The American dream.
>> Yeah. I mean,
>> come from nothing. Go to something. The
appearance that he presents to people is
both his own appearance.
>> Gatsby.
>> Gatsby. The appearance that Gatsby
presents to people is what he looks
like, but also most people never meet
Gatsby
>> in the book. People that come to his
party,
>> he's a story
>> never meet him. So what they see
>> is the house
>> and the champagne and the pools and the
money and the wealth. And I think that
is when when when you think when one
thinks of success in America for many
people that is what they think of
they're not thinking of the man. They're
thinking of all the material items
around them. You know, if you watch
reality TV, if you think of the way that
you ask a person, you know, uh, if you
win the lotto, what would you do with
it? Like, I'd buy a big house.
>> I'd get a nice car. Sure.
>> I'd buy a pool. That's what to so many
characters in this book, not the main
characters, Gatsby represents. He
represents the illusion of uh, wealth
and material and everything that that
means. And ironically, Fitzgerald is
indicting that dream and saying, "And
therefore Gatsby must die."
>> Yeah. I don't think a lot of people take
that lesson.
>> But also, I mean, the other thing that
people don't take is that like this is a
book about people who have all that
stuff and are still miserable.
>> No. And they make each other miserable
and all that idleness actually hurts
them.
>> There is a real critique of that. But
you know if I could add one thing is
that the Roaring 20s is a period between
1920 to 1929 and it's marked by a couple
of things. It's marked by um the women's
right to vote comes the silent film
becomes talkis there is incredible
incredible amount of prosperity that's
built
>> and there's also a migration from the
farm to the city. So all of that is
being chronicled. This book is published
1925 and the most important thing at the
end of the waring 20s is is the great
depression that which comes in 1929
>> which Fitzgerald observed in his
personal life but he didn't know that
when he was writing it at the time. So
all that latitude, all that sloth, all
that idleness, all this carelessness,
it's interesting that history actually
bears out the damage
>> that will come
>> that all that selfishness, all that
self-indulgence actually creates
devastation for everybody,
>> not just the rich, but for everybody.
And I think in that sense all of us a
hundred years afterwards looks at this
example and goes oh that's another
reason why we think this because he was
writing fiction but he was also
>> think this movie is sorry think this
book is great or or or important.
>> Well I think that it's we're lucky to
have this sort of person taking notes on
society. Yeah, I see.
>> Through this narrative
>> and then the conclusion is this great
depression
>> and which he did experience
>> and then we now 100 years ago, wow, this
person noticed something in the culture
emotionally, psychologically and he put
it in drama and that's the reason why we
connect to it.
>> Yes.
>> Don't you think Fitzgerald is telling us
please do not go be like Gatsby?
>> Too late.
I just sort of want to talk about the
way in which this book lives in our
culture now. And I I want to start
superficially because when I was looking
I just wanted to watch one of the
movies. I watched two before we spoke
today. The Bos Lurman aged even worse
than I thought it was going to.
>> Why? In this case, the movie is just
stuck being the book. And I don't think
anybody really understands what's
happening in the book except for
Leonardo DiCaprio. And the reason that
that performance is so good is because
he clearly read the book. He's
identified the sociopath that lives
inside this seemingly glamorous mystery.
But while I was looking for the Lurman
version, it's not on HBO Max where I
thought it would certainly live. HBO Max
is like, "Oh, we don't go. We don't have
this, but here's some stuff we have
that's just like this movie." And here's
what they offered me.
>> What did the algorithm offer you?
>> Are you ready for this?
>> A very long engagement. The Audrey
Tattoo. Uh Jean Pierre Jane.
>> That movie does not exist.
>> War. You've never seen it?
>> No.
>> Oh my god. This is such a Gilbert Cruz
movie.
>> It is. It is. It is the guy who made
Delicateess and Amaly.
>> I've seen Amaly many times.
>> I think it's a World War I movie. Oh.
>> Um with Audrey Tattoo.
>> So is that because both movies were
tagged World War I?
>> Dangerous liaison. Oh,
>> I like that one.
>> Okay.
>> As a as a Gatsby movie or as a movie?
>> No, no, no. As a movie.
>> So just when you when you smell a rat,
say I smell a rat.
>> All right. Dangerous leaison.
>> Okay.
>> Rat.
>> The Bodyguard.
>> What?
>> No.
>> We got to talk.
>> Kevin Cosner.
>> Casablanca.
>> I don't get that.
>> Maybe. You know, like love from the past
that they try to return to but doesn't
work out at the end.
>> Like what? Bridges of Madison County. Is
that next? Because like you're we're
talking now about romances that don't
work.
>> The bridges of Madison County. Yay.
>> Thank you.
She's really good in that. Merryill is
really good in that.
>> That is one of the great performances
anybody's ever given doing anything. And
he is fantastic.
>> His sexiest
>> sexiest Clint.
>> Yeah. I mean, he can be hot. He He's
really strange politically, but yes.
>> The curious case of Benjamin Button.
Obvious reasons based on a Fitzgerald.
Yeah. Story.
>> Rebel without a cause.
Mhm.
>> And the OC.
>> The OC.
>> Yeah.
>> I'm going to show you.
>> What is the OC? Is that television?
>> Is it television? It's the
televisionist. I circled the winner on
my multiple choice card.
>> Oh, wait. Wait. Like poor boy from
Chino.
>> The OCatsby.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> It's unbelievable. I would never have
thought of that.
>> But the algorithm did the algorithm. I
mean, but look how many tries it needed.
a lot.
>> It needed like a dozen tries to get one
right.
>> Better every day.
>> But you're
>> But the OC the what? You guys You guys
smelled a rat every time.
>> That's a stinky index card.
>> Um but the OC
>> The OC is
>> Yeah,
>> it's Gatsby.
>> Every story that has the one that got
away and what would I do to get that
person back?
>> Mhm.
>> That's a Gatsby.
>> That's a That's a misunderstanding of
Gatsby. But a Gatsby movie. Daisy says
something like uh rich girls don't marry
poor boys
>> and I think whenever you have a a
romance across classes
>> as in the OC is reflected there
>> and so I yeah I think that that is part
of it but I also think that there
it's deeper than that right like this
book just exists in the world
and I mean we've kind of talked about it
a lot
>> in Japan Man, I know you wanted to know
that.
>> I'm sorry, what did you say?
>> Gatsby is a hair gel in Japan.
>> Ah, that makes sense. Gats get
>> No, it's just that Gatsby is so uh
popular and it's permeated every aspect
of Asia.
>> Uhhuh. Oh, wait.
>> This book is really important globally.
>> No, no, no. I mean, I
>> like it's this book and Anne Frank.
Everybody's read it.
>> This is
>> Wait, wait. Say more about Gatsby and
Asia. So, if you go to most cities, and
I'm just going to speak for the East
Asian countries because I can't speak
about others right now. I just haven't
been to them enough.
>> You will find a cafe called Gatsby.
>> Mhm. I believe it.
>> And in Japan, they have hair products
and they're called Gatsby. And they are
trying to point to this book. So, if
you're aspirational, if you want to
remake your personality, you put this
stuff on your head. But, of course, I'm
thinking you're going to be dead, right?
>> If you read the book, you're dead in a
swimming pool. It's not good.
>> Yeah. But your hair looks good.
>> But I think as a brand, it's its brand
is strong.
>> Very, very strong.
>> The ways in which this book
>> is so it so captures a like an aspect of
the American experience for white
people, right? And you can graft
yourself onto it, but you're only going
to get but so far, right? it the the the
train you there's a key that you need to
be able to drive the car that far and
for as much as you aspire this is the
this is the kind of um comedy of the
American dream in some way right
>> like you can do everything that you want
to try to get it but it really only
belongs to like one person
>> in Fitzgerald's indictment of the
American dream and of those and what you
just said about how one person can get
away with the architecture and the
creation of all this destruction for his
own purposes.
>> It really reminded me of Audrey Lord.
>> Preach.
>> So the idea that when she says the
master's tools will never dismantle the
master's house, like we can all get this
education, we can all ape their
behavior, we can even have their dreams
and yet it will not work. And I think
that Gerald when he saw that what he was
saying is what Audrey Lord was saying is
that you cannot become something that
you're not.
>> It will destroy you and you will not get
what they can get. Like you cannot be
Tom Buchanan.
>> Tom Buchanan can only be Tom Buchanan.
>> Yeah. Only Tom can be Tom.
>> I really hope that people give this book
the kind of dude that it does deserves.
I mean I know that I was really thinking
about this. I thought like
>> is it underrated?
>> No, no, no. I think it's because it's so
revered.
>> Mhm.
>> And I'm a pretty critical person, but I
think that for me, the architecture of
it, the formation of this, it's really
hard to do what he did.
>> So, you have to give them give him his
flowers, as they say.
>> I hope that this 100th anniversary, like
>> it spurs people on to revisit. I think a
lot of people have read this book. Maybe
they haven't read it in several decades
and read as an adult.
>> Pick it up. As I said, it's short,
beautifully written. There is a lot of
pleasure to be found in this book.
>> And do that exercise that you made us do
is to see which character changed for
you at this moment of rereading because
I do think that's a very valuable
exercise.
>> Ninja Lee, Gilbert Cruz,
I would do this every week. This book
should turn 100 every week.
>> Thanks for coming.
>> Thank you, Wesley.
>> You're welcome.
>> Thank you so much for having me. It was
really fun.